




Buyer's Guide




New Jersey Auto Insurance Buyer's Guide
Where Do I Start?
Car insurance is required in New Jersey. Whether you are buying a new insurance policy or renewing your current policy, you must make many decisions about what coverage you need and how much you can pay. The following guide outlines how to make choices that work for you.
Understand Your Needs
Do you rent or own your own home? Do you have assets to protect (including income from a job)? Will your own health insurance cover auto accident injuries? How much insurance coverage can you afford? These are some of the questions you should ask yourself before choosing a specific coverage plan.
Understand Your Options
Use this guide to learn about the words and phrases used in auto policies. Know the many coverage options. Review the different benefits of each option.
Understand Consumer Protections
As a New Jersey auto insurance consumer, you have rights. You have a right to fair and equal treatment, and you have the right to get the information you need to make informed decisions.
Agents, brokers and companies must inform you of your coverage options when applying for a new policy, or at any time upon your request if you are already insured. You have the right to know how each choice may affect what you pay and what your benefits would be in the event of an accident. You always have the right to ask about additional options.
You can shop for auto insurance at any time - not just when your policy is up for renewal, and if you find a better price, you can cancel your old policy and seek a refund of your unused premium.
You have the right to change your coverages and policy limits at any time, even if you are not near your renewal date. If you select options that save you money, you have a right to a refund of your unused premium within 60 days.


Understanding Your Policy
Types of Coverages
Insurance policies use terms that may be unfamiliar to the average driver. It is useful to understand what these terms mean so you can make better, more informed decisions about your coverage.
Your auto insurance policy is divided into different coverages based on the type of claim that will be paid to you or others.
Coverages
Personal Injury Protection: Otherwise known as 'PIP,'' this is your medical coverage for injuries you (and others) suffer in an auto accident. PIP pays if you or other persons covered under your policy are injured in an auto accident. It is sometimes called 'no-fault' coverage because it pays your own medical expenses no matter who caused the auto accident. PIP has two parts: (1) coverage for the cost of treatment you receive from hospitals, doctors and other medical providers and any medical equipment that may be needed to treat your injuries and (2) reimbursement for certain other expenses you may have because you are hurt, such as lost wages and the need to hire someone to take care of your home or family.


Standard and Basic Policies


Coverage
Standard Policy
Basic Policy


Bodily Injury
As low as: $25,000 per person, but $10,000 for all persons, per accident, is available as an option
Coverage is not included


Liability
As high as: $500,000 per accident$250,000 per person
$250,000 per accident


Property Damage
As low as: $25,000 per accidentAs high as: $100,000 or more
$5,000 per accident


Personal Injury Protection
As low as: $15,000 per person, per accidentAs high as: $250,000 or more
Not Available


Uninsured/Underinsured Motorist Coverage
Coverage available up to amounts selected for liability coverage
None


Collision
Available as an option (from some insurers)
Available as an option (from some insurers)


Comprehensive
Available as an option (from some insurers)
Available as an option (from some insurers)




Commonly Asked Questions
How Do I File a Claim?
If you're involved in an accident, you'll need to file a claim with your insurance company. This process typically involves contacting your insurer, providing details of the accident, and submitting any necessary documentation such as police reports or medical bills.
What Should I Do After an Accident?
After an accident, it's important to prioritize safety. Check for injuries and call emergency services if necessary. Exchange information with the other parties involved and gather evidence such as photos of the scene. Then, contact your insurance company to report the accident.


Limits and Deductibles
LIMITS: Limit is the maximum dollar amount the insurer will pay following an auto accident. Limits vary with each coverage within the policy.
DEDUCTIBLES: Deductibles are payments you have to make before the insurer pays. For example, a 750 USD deductible means that you pay the first 750 USD of each claim.
EXAMPLE
John has a car accident. His repair shop estimates the cost of repairs at $2,000. John pays $750 of the bill and his insurance company pays the remainder.


Understanding Your Options
Deductible Options
In addition to any savings you may realize from how much coverage you buy, deductibles also provide savings opportunities. Cost savings can be achieved by choosing higher deductibles. Thus, if you feel you need a high level of PIP coverage but want to reduce your premium, you can save money by agreeing to pay more out-of-pocket through a higher deductible if you are injured in an auto accident. Your insurer will pay the medical bills over the deductible amount you choose. No matter what deductible you choose, there is also a 20 percent co-payment for medical expenses between the deductible selected and 5,000 USD. That means you pay 20 percent, and your insurer pays 80 percent.
EXAMPLE
Sam and Jane each have an accident that results in $10,000 in medical expenses.
Sam chose the minimum $250 deductible. He pays the $250 deductible plus $950 (20 percent of the $4,750 that is left of the first $5,000) and the insurer pays the remaining $8,800.
Jane chose the $2,500 PIP deductible for a 25 percent reduction in the PIP premium. She pays the first $2,500 as the deductible. She also pays $500 (20 percent of the $2,500 that is left of the first $5,000) and the insurer pays the remaining $7,000.


Uninsured/Underinsured Motorist Coverage
UNINSURED MOTORIST COVERAGE: Pays you if you are in an auto accident caused by a driver who does not have the minimum level of insurance required by law. Claims that you would have made against the uninsured driver who caused the accident are paid by your own policy. Uninsured motorist coverage does not pay benefits to the uninsured driver.
A minimum amount of Uninsured/Underinsured Motorist Coverage is required. You can purchase higher limits if you want more coverage.
UNDERINSURED MOTORIST COVERAGE: Pays you if you are in an auto accident caused by a driver who is insured, but who has less coverage than your underinsured motorist coverage. Damages greater than the limits of the other driver's policy are covered by your policy up to the difference between the limits of your underinsured motorist coverage and the other driver's policy limit.


The Right to Sue
For the STANDARD POLICY, you must make a choice about the rights you will have if you are injured in an automobile accident. (The BASIC POLICY includes the LIMITED RIGHT TO SUE option.)
IMPORTANT
The choice you make affects how much your insurance will cost and what claims will be paid in the event of an accident.
The choice you make regarding your right to sue another driver applies to you, your spouse, children and other relatives living with you who are not covered under another automobile insurance policy.
The UNLIMITED RIGHT TO SUE and LIMITED RIGHT TO SUE options only cover lawsuits for 'pain and suffering' or non-economic losses. Your medical expenses and some economic losses for injuries in auto accidents will be paid up to the limits of your PIP coverage and are not affected by the choice you make here.
UNLIMITED RIGHT TO SUE
UNLIMITED RIGHT TO SUE - Under the No Limitation on Lawsuit Option, you retain the right to sue the person who caused an auto accident for pain and suffering for any injury.
LIMITED RIGHT TO SUE
By choosing the Limitation on Lawsuit Option, you agree not to sue the person who caused an auto accident for your pain and suffering unless you sustain one of the permanent injuries listed below: (Choosing this option does not affect your ability to sue for economic damages such as medical expenses and lost wages.)

loss of body part
significant disfigurement or significant scarring
a displaced fracture
loss of a fetus
permanent injury (Any injury shall be considered permanent when the body part or organ, or both, has not healed to function normally and will not heal to function normally with further medical treatment based on objective medical proof.)
death

WARNING: Insurance companies or their producers or representatives shall not be held liable for your choice of lawsuit option (Limited Right to Sue or Unlimited Right to Sue) or for your choices regarding amounts and types of coverage. You cannot sue an insurance company or its producers or representatives if the Limited Right to Sue option is imposed by law because no choice was made on the coverage selection form. Insurers and their producers or representatives can lose this limitation on liability for failing to act in accordance with the law. See N.J.S.A. 17:28-1.9 for more information.



POLICY OPTIONS CHART


COVERAGES
Options That Cost Less
Options That Cost More



What Most Drivers Choose





LIABILITY: Bodily Injury and Property Damage
$75,000
$300,000

$500,000



PERSONAL INJURY PROTECTION (PIP)
Medical Expense Limit $15,000
$250,000
Some insurers may offer more than $250,000
$75,000
$150,000



Medical Deductible
$500; $1,000
$250
$2,000; $2,500





Extra PIP Options: Income Continuation, Essential Services, Death Benefit and Funeral Expense Benefit
You can decline the Extra PIP Package
Most consumers choose the Extra PIP Package

Packages may be available in higher amounts




Health Insurer for PIP Option
Choose your own health insurer
Most consumers do not choose their own health insurer






UNINSURED/UNDERINSURED MOTORIST COVERAGE
$75,000
$300,000

$500,000



COLLISION COVERAGE DEDUCTIBLE
$750; $1,000
$500
$1,500; $2,000
$50; $100, $150
$200, $250


COMPREHENSIVE COVERAGE DEDUCTIBLE
$750; $1,000
$500
$1,500; $2,000
$50; $100, $150
$200, $250


LAWSUIT OPTION
Limitation on Lawsuit Option


No Limitation on Lawsuit Option










